---
title: Snow Leopard Monitoring
subtitle: Conservation
summary: Non-invasive snow leopard monitoring using computer vision analysis of camera trap photos to identify individual animals.
clients:
  - name: OSI Panthera
    link: https://www.osi-panthera.org/
    logo: /images/clients/osi-panthera/logo.jpg
  - name: OSI
    link: https://www.science-camps.com/
    logo: /images/clients/osi/logo.png
tools:
  - Interactive Map
  - Machine Learning
  - Computer Vision
  - Local Feature Matching
status: fundraising
pinned: true
date: 2025-02-04
image: /images/projects/snow_leopard_monitoring/cover.png
---

## ðŸ˜‡ Looking for Funding

{{< donate_sponsor_cta >}}

<br/>

## Context

Snow leopards are an endangered species found in the high mountain ranges of
Central and South Asia, including the Himalayas. Their population numbers are
difficult to estimate precisely, but current estimates suggest there are
between 4,000-7,500 snow leopards remaining in the wild.

In the Himalayan region, snow leopard populations are found in the mountainous
areas of India, Nepal, Bhutan, Kyrgyzstan and Pakistan. The largest populations
are believed to be in India, which is estimated to have around 500-700 snow
leopards. Nepal and Bhutan likely have a few hundred each, Kyrgyzstan has
around 300-400 individuals while Pakistan has around 200-420 snow leopards.

## Vital Roles of Snow Leopards

Snow leopards play a vital role in the ecosystems of the high mountain regions
where they are found, for several key reasons:

- __Apex predator__: As the top predator in their alpine and subalpine
habitats, snow leopards help maintain the balance of prey species populations.
They primarily prey on wild ungulates like blue sheep, Himalayan ibex, and
Asiatic wild dogs.
- __Indicator species__: The presence and health of snow leopard populations is
an indicator of the overall ecological integrity of their mountain ecosystems.
Their decline signals broader environmental degradation.
- __Seed dispersal__: Snow leopards help disperse the seeds of various plant
species through their feces, contributing to the regeneration of vegetation in
their habitat.
- __Nutrient cycling__: As apex predators, snow leopards play a crucial role in
nutrient cycling by transferring energy and nutrients from their prey to other
parts of the ecosystem.
- __Prey population control__: By preying on herbivores like blue sheep and
ibex, snow leopards help prevent overgrazing and maintain the balance of
vegetation in their habitat.
- __Flagship species__: Snow leopards are a charismatic and iconic species that
serve as a flagship for conservation efforts in the Himalayas and Central Asia.
Protecting snow leopards also protects the entire mountain ecosystem.
- __Cultural significance__: Snow leopards hold immense cultural and spiritual
significance for many indigenous communities in their range countries, further
emphasizing their importance.

By maintaining the health and balance of their high-altitude ecosystems, snow
leopards are truly a keystone species in the Himalayas and other mountain
regions of Central and South Asia. Their conservation is crucial for the
overall ecological well-being of these fragile environments.

## Conservation Threats to Snow Leopards

Snow leopard numbers have declined over the past few decades due to a variety
of threats, including poaching, retaliatory killings by local herders, loss of
prey species, and habitat fragmentation. Climate change is also a growing
concern, as it may reduce the snow leopard's alpine habitat over time.

Conservation efforts are underway to protect snow leopards, including
anti-poaching patrols, livestock insurance programs to reduce human-wildlife
conflict, and habitat restoration. However, the remote and rugged terrain of
the Himalayas makes monitoring and protecting snow leopards a significant
challenge. Continued international cooperation and local community engagement
will be crucial to ensuring the long-term survival of this elusive and iconic
big cat.

### Poaching

Snow leopards face a significant threat from poaching, as they are targeted for
their valuable fur and bones, which are in high demand in the illegal wildlife
trade, particularly in Asian countries. Poaching is a major threat across the
snow leopard's range, with organized poaching networks operating in the remote
mountain areas that the species inhabits. Combating this threat is challenging
due to weak law enforcement and a lack of resources for anti-poaching patrols
in many snow leopard habitats.

![Poaching Snow Leopard](/images/projects/snow_leopard_monitoring/poaching_fur.jpg)
*Gallery / Some 20% of snow leopards are killed for the illegal fur trade, though pelts from animals killed for other reasons are often sold on. Photograph: Tessa McGregor/Traffic*

### Retaliatory killings

The conflict between snow leopards and local herding communities poses a
significant threat to the big cats' conservation. Snow leopards, as apex
predators, sometimes prey on livestock, which can lead to tensions with the
herders whose livelihoods depend on their animals. In response, these local
communities may retaliate by killing snow leopards in an effort to protect
their livestock and their means of subsistence. This human-wildlife conflict is
particularly acute in areas where snow leopard populations overlap with the
grazing lands used by herders, as the cats' natural prey species have declined
due to factors such as overhunting and habitat loss. Addressing this complex
issue, which pits the needs of local communities against the conservation of an
endangered species, is crucial for ensuring the long-term survival of the snow
leopard.

### Loss of prey species

Snow leopards are highly dependent on wild ungulate species such as ibex, blue
sheep, and Himalayan tahr as their primary prey. However, these prey
populations have faced significant declines in many areas due to a combination
of factors, including overhunting, habitat loss, and competition with
livestock. As a result of the dwindling numbers of their natural prey, snow
leopards are increasingly forced to turn to livestock as a food source. This
shift in prey selection exacerbates the already complex issue of human-wildlife
conflict, as local herding communities seek to protect their livelihoods and
livestock from the predatory snow leopards. Addressing the loss of the snow
leopards' natural prey base is therefore a crucial component of conservation
efforts, as it not only helps to maintain the ecological balance of these
high-altitude ecosystems, but also mitigates the tensions between the big cats
and the human communities that share their habitat.

TODO: add images of their preys

### Habitat fragmentation and degradation

The snow leopard's habitat is under threat from a variety of human activities
and development projects. Infrastructure development, such as the construction
of roads, mines, and hydropower facilities, is fragmenting and degrading the
alpine and subalpine environments that these big cats call home. Additionally,
the overgrazing of livestock and unsustainable resource extraction practices
are further contributing to the loss and degradation of snow leopard habitat.
The resulting fragmentation of their natural range makes it increasingly
difficult for snow leopards to find mates and maintain viable, interconnected
populations. This habitat loss and fragmentation is a significant challenge for
snow leopard conservation, as it disrupts the big cats' ability to freely roam
and access the resources they need to thrive.

### Climate Change

The snow leopard's future is further threatened by the impacts of climate
change. Rising temperatures and shifting precipitation patterns are expected to
reduce the availability of the alpine and subalpine habitats that these big
cats rely on. As glaciers melt and treelines move to higher elevations, snow
leopards may be forced to seek refuge in areas where their natural prey and
suitable habitat are less abundant. This could exacerbate the existing
challenges they face, such as human-wildlife conflicts and habitat loss. As the
snow leopard's environment undergoes these dramatic transformations, the big
cats may be compelled to venture into closer proximity with human settlements
and activities, heightening the potential for clashes with local communities.

## Project Scope and Objectives

We are partnering with [OSI Panthera](https://www.osi-panthera.org/), a
non-governmental organization (NGO) that organizes citizen science expeditions
in Central Asia. OSI Panthera's primary goal is to study and protect the
wildlife in Central Asia, with a particular focus on the snow leopard (Panthera
uncia), which serves as an umbrella species for the region's ecosystems.

### OSI Panthera

The program also has a strong educational component, aimed at raising awareness
among local and international participants about the importance of ecology and
biodiversity conservation. These expeditions involve the collection of evidence
of the presence of sensitive species, such as snow leopards, as well as other
carnivores, ungulates, and birds.

All the data collected in and around the Shamshy and Chon Jarguilchak valleys
are then analyzed to better understand the local ecosystems and their
sustainability. OSI Panthera works closely with local organizations, such as
the Snow Leopard Foundation in Kyrgyzstan (the local organization of the [Snow
Leopard Trust](https://snowleopard.org/)), and employs Kyrgyz guides,
translators, and students to support the scientific and educational work in the
field.

![Kyrgyzstan, Naryn State Reserve](/images/projects/snow_leopard_monitoring/reserve_map.png)
*Kyrgyzstan, Naryn State Reserve - The monitoring expeditions take place in the
Naryn State Reserve*

### Camera Trap Analysis

OSI Panthera manages the deployment of camera traps within the reserve to
monitor wildlife and estimate population trends over time. Each year, they
collect the camera trap data and analyze it. This is a tedious process, as it
involves classifying gigabytes of images to discriminate between the different
Himalayan species.

We plan to collaborate with OSI Panthera on complementary projects to enhance
their analysis.

#### Automated Classification of Camera Trap Data

We will be developing and improving their process with an open-source machine
learning model that can accurately classify the various species found in the
area, such as grey wolves, Pallas cats, brown bears, pikas, snow leopards,
tetraes...

This machine learning model for identifying individual snow leopards will be
made available to other NGOs and conservation organizations working in similar
regions with comparable species. It holds the potential to significantly aid
various conservation efforts across the Himalayan region by providing a
reliable and scalable method for monitoring not only snow leopard populations
but other endemic species. By making this tool openly available, we aim to
support the broader conservation community in their efforts to protect this
iconic species and its fragile mountain ecosystems.

#### Spatio Temporal Analysis of detected species

We are building a standalone, cross-platform, open-source application to
interactively visualize the results of camera trap data. This application will
benefit the broader conservation community, as it will work with any camera
trap dataset and allow users to visualize species detections on an interactive
map.

#### Identification of Snow Leopards

Accurately monitoring the snow leopard population is crucial, and a key
component of this is the ability to identify individual animals from camera
trap images based on their unique spot patterns and markings. Currently, this
identification process is done manually by volunteers, which is a
time-consuming and error-prone task. To address this challenge, we are planning
to spearhead the development of a machine learning model that can automatically
recognize and distinguish individual snow leopards. In the process, we will be
building a comprehensive catalog of the snow leopards found within the region.
Automating this identification process has the potential to significantly
streamline and improve the reliability of snow leopard population monitoring
efforts, providing conservation organizations with a powerful tool to better
understand and protect this elusive and endangered species.
